---
title: Things I Learned in 2020
date: "2020-12-31"
description: "Compilation of my favourite things I learned in 2020."
---

2020 has been quite the year for most of us. With the COVID-19 pandemic consuming a lot of our attention, the year exits leaving behind a bitter taste for many. While the year lacked the usual activity, 2020 has been a year of tremendous growth and learning for me personally. And what better way to end the year than to share some of my favourite things I learned in 2020. Here's a compilation of 7 things I learned in 2020. These takeaways were inspired by experiences, people, and reflections over the past year.

1. **Be kind to yourself so you can be kind to others.** I grew up in environments that criticized my flaws more than they celebrated my achievements. Naturally, the critical voice has a strong foothold in my thoughts. Experiencing social anxiety did not help my situation either. Recently, I've realized that the harsh critic in me isn't just affecting me, but it's also affecting my conversations and relationships with others. The solution to this I've found is to train myself to allow the kinder voice in my head to replace the critical voice that often dominates my thoughts. As I try to be more kind to my mistakes and imperfections, I project that same kindness towards others. How we treat ourselves is akin to how we treat others. The more kindness we show ourselves, the more we can give back to the world. 

2. **Seek to gain perspectives, not uncover truths.** Throughout my life, I sought after truth. Absolute and universal truths that I could live my life by. But the more I grow, the more my faith in the existence of absolute truths wanes. A lot of life is about living through the proper lenses. The larger our collection of lenses, the higher our chance of having the best lens for the time and situation. The better our ability to pick out lenses, the quicker we will navigate the maze of life. I have taken it on myself to constantly seek out perspectives, by reading content, listening to people for their diverse ideas. We all live in our own bubbles, and it is difficult to know what's out there that is not within our little bubble. The more we learn various perspectives, the more options we have to find what's best for us. Chase perspectives, not truths because they're much more valuable. 

3. **Seek to understand rather than argue.** I've treated a lot of conversations with others as subtle debates in my head. I have a good eye for spotting logical deficiencies in things others say and this results in often presenting quick counterarguments to the ideas of others. I'm arguing against my own ideas in my head all the time and it gets projected into conversations all the time. This conversation style is clearly not great for making friends and more importantly it's not the best approach to learning something from the conversation. If we approach conversations with a mindset of trying to understand the other's perspective, we're more likely to come away with something we don't already know. We can always put the ideas we hear under the microphones of our scrutiny later but we can't hear those perspectives that we were too quick to dismiss again. 

4. **Listen to your heart, not just your head.** For most of my life, I have learned to make rational decisions well. Rational decisions are great when you need to stop yourself from making that compulsive purchase or when you need to make a long term life decision. But living life through your head gets dry. Our feelings are an integral part of who we are. The more space we give to our heart, the more content we become with our life. I grew up learning to ignore my feelings so it's natural for me to overlook what my heart desires. Over the past year, I have gradually allowed my heart to call more shots and it has only resulted in living a more fulfilling life. 

5. **Learn to be more present.** A lot of the anxiety that I experience comes from the anticipation of the future. What will happen to me 5 years from now? What do I really want to do with my life? While these questions are great to ponder upon from time to time, they can also deter our progress. Throughout the past year, I've found myself perplexed by these questions without making any significant progress towards any direction. Learning to live in the present and going with the flow is a more effective use of time. If we simply exist in the questions of our mind, we miss what's in front of us. And sometimes what's in front of us is the answer to those questions. Live more in the present and less inside your head, you'll go further.

6. **Don't let other people's opinions change how you view yourself.** There exists at least two images of you. There's an image of you built upon how you view yourself and there's an image that others view you from. It's easy to allow the image others view you from to distort your image of yourself. A key part of building a strong self-identity where we accept ourselves as we are is to build the resistance against other people's opinions of ourselves. The more we build our identity through our inner being, the more we separate ourselves from the judgments and opinions of those around us. Those who truly want to know you will get to know you for who you are and not because of what others have to say about you. 

7. **Your beliefs limit you more than your circumstances.** We often attribute people's achievements to talent or luck. It's easy for us to spot the talents and the circumstances that allow people to succeed. Often what we don't get to see is the incredible self-belief that drives people's progress. It's not necessarily about the talent or luck you possess, but rather the sheer sense of self-belief that allows you to make progress towards your goals on a consistent basis. With enough time and effort, anything is achievable. 
